Intro Screen: (what the user first sees when scanning the QR marker)

Welcome to Harmony Mills! Move your smart-device around to explore different parts of the mills. Tap on parts of it that look interesting to you and you may learn more about Harmony Mills and how it used to function.

The Cohoes Manufacturing Company began building a textile mill along the Hudson and Mohawk Rivers in 1811, but a fire claimed the mill in 1815, shortly after the mill's completion. The Cohoes Manufacturing Company tried to rebuild the mill but yet another fire burned it down in 1829. Six years later, the Harmony Manufacturing Company was founded and built what we know today as Harmony Mills. The Mills was very successful during the 1800s and produced tens of millions of yards of cloth per year. However, by 1930, Harmony Mills started to lose money during operation and had to be shut down within the next five years.

How The Harmony Mills Turbine Works:

The remaining turbine that used to power Harmony Mills was one of the largest water-powered turbines in the country.
There was once five turbines powering Harmony Mills but three of them were scrapped for their metal in WWII.
Water poured into the turbine from a canal just outside the mills, which created a pressure drop on the back of the turbine wheel's spokes.
This pressure change caused the wheel to spin and mechanical energy of the spinning wheel is transferred to the power belt system connected to every floor of the Mills.


Story of the Discovery of the Cohoes Mastodon:

In September of 1836, excavation for Mill No. 3 of Harmony Mills began and the first of the Cohoes Mastodon's bones were found buried sixty feet underground. A week later, construction workers unearthed the lower jaw and some molars of the Mastodon. Workers continued to find more and more parts of the Cohoes Mastodon scattered along the Mohawk River in the coming months. Eventually, the whole skeleton was found and kept at Harmony Mills, the place where the bones were found in the first place. The Cohoes Mastodon would not stay there forever though as it would move to Troy, the county fair, and Cohoes' Harmony Hall. Today, the Mastodon skeleton can be found on display in the State Museum in Albany for many to enjoy.


How the Power Belt System Works:

The power belt system that transferred power to the textile machinery consisted of multiple wheels and belts wrapped around them that connected to the turbines in the basement on one end and all the floors of the mills on the other end.  The spinning belts that spun around the wheels were made of leather, which was unique only to the United States during the Inudstrial Revolution (other countries like Great Britain used ropes instead). Once the belt transferred energy to a certain floor, it began to spin a horizontal shaft on that floor that was connected to a row of textile looms on that particular floor.  A particular floor of the mills contained several rows of looms, which required that there would be several horizontal shafts on that floor to transfer power to them.

How the Boiler House Works:

The boiler house provided another source of energy for powering Harmony Mills.  It took in air, water, and coal to produce steam at very high pressures.  
Steam had many uses in the textile mill including dying and drying clothing produced.  The tower you see sticking out of the boiler house is called a cooling tower and it was used to remove excess heat produced by the boiler in order to cool the circulating water used inside the boiler house.